UPTIME MONITOR PROJECT - PLAIN ENGLISH NOTES

What are we building?
----------------------
We are building a website monitoring system. A user will be able to tell the
system to watch a website, such as https://example.com. The system will later
check that website regularly and report whether it is working.

The planned programming languages are:

- Java with Spring Boot: the main backend application and API
- Python: a worker that checks websites
- TypeScript and React: the browser dashboard
- SQL: the language used to work with the PostgreSQL database

What is Spring Boot?
--------------------
Spring Boot is a Java framework. A framework is a set of code and conventions
that helps us build applications without creating every basic part ourselves.

Our Spring Boot application will be the backend. It will receive requests from
the dashboard, save information in the database, and coordinate the other
parts of the system.

What is an API?
---------------
An API is a way for programs to communicate with each other.

For example, the dashboard could send this request to our backend:

POST /api/monitors

with this JSON data:

{
  "name": "My Website",
  "url": "https://example.com",
  "intervalSeconds": 60,
  "timeoutSeconds": 10,
  "enabled": true
}

The backend would save the monitor and send a response back.

What is a monitor?
------------------
A monitor is one website that the system should watch. It contains:

- A name, such as "My Website"
- A URL, such as "https://example.com"
- How often to check it
- How long to wait for a response
- Whether monitoring is enabled
- When it was created

What does CRUD mean?
--------------------
CRUD describes the four basic things we can do with data:

- Create a monitor
- Read a monitor
- Update a monitor
- Delete a monitor

Our API currently has these endpoints:

GET    /api/monitors       Get all monitors
GET    /api/monitors/{id}  Get one monitor
POST   /api/monitors       Create a monitor
PUT    /api/monitors/{id}  Update a monitor
DELETE /api/monitors/{id}  Delete a monitor

What do the Java files do?
--------------------------

Monitor.java
This is the model/entity. It describes what a monitor looks like in Java and
in the database.

MonitorRepository.java
This is the database access layer. It gives the application methods for
saving, finding, and deleting monitors in PostgreSQL.

MonitorRequest.java
This describes data coming into the API. It also validates the data, so a
blank name or invalid URL can be rejected before it reaches the database.

MonitorResponse.java
This describes data going out of the API. It controls the format of the JSON
we send back to the caller.

MonitorService.java
This contains the application logic. It connects the controller to the
repository and handles things such as finding a monitor or reporting that it
does not exist.

MonitorController.java
This exposes the HTTP endpoints. It receives requests from other programs and
passes the work to the service.

What is PostgreSQL?
-------------------
PostgreSQL is a database. A database stores information so it is still there
after the application stops.

Our database will eventually contain monitors, check results, incidents,
users, and alert settings.

What is Docker Compose?
-----------------------
Docker Compose is a way to describe services that our project needs. Our
compose.yaml file says that the project needs a PostgreSQL database.

Docker is not installed on the current computer yet, so the database tests
cannot run locally until Docker or PostgreSQL is installed.

What is Maven?
--------------
Maven is a Java build tool. It downloads Java libraries, compiles the code,
runs tests, and builds the application.

The files mvnw and mvnw.cmd are Maven Wrappers. They let the project use its
own Maven setup instead of requiring Maven to be installed globally.

What is Git?
------------
Git tracks changes to the project. A commit is a saved checkpoint in the
project history.

The first commit is:

472e053 Build initial uptime monitor API

What is GitHub?
---------------
GitHub stores a copy of the Git project online. It lets employers view the
code and lets you share the project as part of your portfolio.

The project is committed locally, but it is not connected to GitHub yet. A
GitHub repository URL is needed before the project can be pushed online.

The URL usually looks like this:

https://github.com/your-username/uptime-monitor.git

Planned build order
-------------------
1. Build the Spring Boot API and connect PostgreSQL.
2. Add user registration, login, and security.
3. Build the React and TypeScript dashboard.
4. Build the Python website-checking worker.
5. Connect the worker to the backend.
6. Add incidents, history, and notifications.
7. Add Docker, automated tests, and deployment.

Useful commands
---------------

Build the Java project without running database tests:

    .\mvnw.cmd -DskipTests package

Start PostgreSQL after Docker is installed:

    docker compose up -d postgres

Run the Spring Boot application:

    .\mvnw.cmd spring-boot:run

The most important idea
-----------------------
We are building one small working feature at a time. Each layer has one job:
the controller handles web requests, the service handles application rules,
the repository handles database access, and the entity represents stored data.
